---
layout: post
title: Dev Journal 01 - Valuable Lessons
tags:
  - professional-practice
description: >
  
hero: /uploads/code.JPG
overlay: purple
published: true
---

Consider this post a little letter to myself and to anyone out there who's struggled with work ethic, anxiety and self improvement. This is just my 2 cents on the topics, so take it with a grain of salt. 


My third and final year of university has been full of amazing experiences this far and I think I've learned a lot in the process, but here's what I consider most important.

# Doing It All At Once Won't Get You Far
When I chose to do the LOD tool brief I didn't have much of a clue how Python in Unreal Engine 4 works, what its use cases are, I didn't even really know Python syntax all that well. The tendency to go to university really early in the morning, work until 5 then go home and work more (on the same project) was a real struggle for me to begin with. I'd come home exhausted from the heat of a room packed with computers, grab a quick bite then go right back to work. Does that sound healthy to you? Me neither, not anymore.


That's when the "no more uni work after you get home" rule came in quite handy, and I can proudly say I haven't broken it in ages. The only exceptions were a couple times when I wanted to make sure Git works on both ends (spoiler alert, it didn't), and one lazy Sunday morning when I felt like cleaning up my shader graphs. 


To my peers: please make sure to check in with yourself frequently. Nothing worthwile can come out of a 14 hour work binge. I used to frequently work long hours but in reality I was just really slow from how tired I was.

# Take the Weekend Off
You heard me. Take the weekend off, relax, read that book you've been meaning to read. I'm not someone to say "just chill man, go for a walk", maybe that's not your definition of relaxation, so whatever it is that you love doing outside of work, take your time and enjoy yourself. Remember **you time** is just as important for your development.

# Stay Calm and Be Yourself During Interviews
Like I said, I'm writing this post as a reminder for myself as well, so I will most likely eventually return and read it again to take my advice. Stressing out won't you help get that job. Being yourself and having a casual conversation however might get you a bit closer. I've had the wonderful opportunity to interview with two amazing companies this far, so I'd love to talk a bit about the process.

## The First Call
This is usually a quick phone call with a recruiter or hiring manager to help understand who you are and whether or not you'd be a good fit for the company and if they would be a good fit for you.

## The Second Part
From here on out you're more likely to speak to more specialized people, such as the lead of your (potential) department, a producer, or anyone who's part of the development team. At this point you might also have some sort of an art test. The only thing I have to say here is remember who you are and how you got this far. Remember how much you have to offer, and that since you've gotten to this part of the application process, they're interested in you. Remember that communication is everything, and this is your chance to show your full potential. Staying calm and composed is key, remember the people interviewing you are **humans**, just like you.

# Curiosity Will Get You Places
Staying curious is being proactive, at least in my book. I find myself going down rabbit holes of tech art blogs and youtube videos with 200 views, and it keeps me going. I love playing games or watching a walkthrough and thinking "hmm, I wonder how they did that", then actually looking into how they do it. More often than not I won't actually find my answer as these things are never really disclosed, so all I'm left with is speculation. But I can say, the one time I found an article about the Nortlight Engine and the in-depth stuff about its procedural glitch mechanics, I couldn't stop reading. I needed more.


Last night before bed I thought to myself "I don't actually know the maths behind the fresnel node". It was a bit awkward, but I looked it up and I found a really good explanation that helped me understand a lot more about it. Up until yesterday, the fresnel node was more or less just the "cool outer glow effect node that you usually plug into the alpha of a lerp", but now I know that what it does is it returns a value of either 0 (when the surface normal points at the camera) or 1 (when the angle between the surface normal and the camera is 90°). When the value is 0, there is no Fresnel effect happening, however when it is 1 you can see it doing its magic. 


Sorry for the ramble, this is a tech art blog after all. Back to my point, stay curious, look up whatever goes through your head whether it be related to your preferred area of game art or not. It never hurts to know more.


With the help of two really talented classmates of mine, I managed to make tinsel for my Shader Museum using xGen in Maya yesterday. If you were to tell me that I'd be doing that at the beinning of my shader focused project, I'd tell you you're insane. I'm not saying it was my favourite thing in the world to do, but it was nevertheless really fun. The challenge now is to optimise it in UE4 so I can actually use it in my project, as it really tanks my FPS.

# Stop Comparing Yourself
I cannot stress this enough, constantly comparing yourself is the most toxic thing you can do. I'm not saying don't look at others' work- most definitely do. But instead of saying "they're so much better than me", next time try saying "I have so much to learn from this". Thinking you're not good enough after looking at a Senior's work will in some cases lead to anxiety and in worse cases, imposter syndrome. That's a really hard thing to recover from believe me, I've been there. 


Luckily enough, I haven't heard of people doing this much within the technical art community (or maybe I just haven't interacted enough with other TAs), but I see this a lot in Concept Art and Character Art.


Once again, to my peers: you're wonderfully talented, you've grown so much and you will keep growing. Trust the process, keep practicing. Everyone's learning curve is different. Believe in yourself. 


### And that's it! I hope everyone reading this understands that this is just my 2 cents, I'm just sharing what I consider to be the most valuable lessons I've learned this far into my final year of university. Take it or leave it, but regardless I hope to see you in my next post. Take care!